The idea of eternal return is a mysterious one, and Nietzsche has often perplexed other philosophers with 
it: to think that everything recurs as we once experienced it, and that the recurrence itself recurs ad 
infinitum! What does this mad myth signify? 

Putting it negatively, the myth of eternal return states that a life which disappears once and for all, 
which does not return, is like a shadow, without weight, dead in advance, and whether it was horrible, 
beautiful, or sublime, its horror, sublimity, and beauty mean nothing. We need take no more note of it than 
of a war between two African kingdoms in the fourteenth century, a war that altered nothing in the destiny 
of the world, even if a hundred thousand blacks perished in excruciating torment. 

Will the war between two African kingdoms in the fourteenth century itself be altered if it recurs again 
and again, in eternal return? 

It will: it will become a solid mass, permanently protuberant, its inanity irreparable. 

If the French Revolution were to recur eternally, French historians would be less proud of Robespierre. But because they deal with 
something that will not return, the bloody years of the Revolution have turned into mere words, theories, and discussions, have become lighter 
than feathers, frightening no one. There is an infinite difference between a Robespierre who occurs only once in history and a Robespierre 
who eternally returns, chopping off French heads. 

Let us therefore agree that the idea of eternal return implies a perspective from which things appear other than as we know them: they 
appear without the mitigating circumstance of their transitory nature. This mitigating circumstance prevents us from coming to a verdict. For 
how can we condemn something that is ephemeral, in transit? In the sunset of dissolution, everything is illuminated by the aura of nostalgia, 
even the guillotine. 

Not long ago, I caught myself experiencing a most incredible sensation. Leafing through a book on Hitler, I was touched by some of his 
portraits: they reminded me of my childhood. I grew up during the war; several members of my family perished in Hitler's concentration 
camps; but what were their deaths compared with the memories of a lost period in my life, a period that would never return? 

This reconciliation with Hitler reveals the profound moral perversity of a world that rests essentially on the nonexistence of return, for in 
t his world everything is pardoned in advance and therefore everything cynically permitted. 

If every second of our lives recurs an infinite number of times, we are nailed to eternity as Jesus Christ was nailed to the cross. It is a 
terrifying prospect. In the world of eternal return the weight of unbearable responsibility lies heavy on every move we make. That is why 



Nietzsche called the idea of eternal return the heaviest of burdens (das schwerste Gewicht). 

If eternal return is the heaviest of burdens, then our lives can stand out against it in all their splendid lightness. 

But is heaviness truly deplorable and lightness splendid? 

The heaviest of burdens crushes us, we sink beneath it, it pins us to the ground. But in the love poetry of every age, the woman longs to be 
weighed down by the man's body. The heaviest of burdens is therefore simultaneously an image of life's most intense fulfillment. The heavier 
the burden, the closer our lives come to the earth, the more real and truthful they become. 

Conversely, the absolute absence of a burden causes man to be lighter than air, to soar into the heights, take leave of the earth and his 
earthly being, and become only half real, his movements as free as they are insignificant. 

What then shall we choose? Weight or lightness? 

Parmenides posed this very question in the sixth century before Christ. He saw the world divided into pairs of opposites: 
light/darkness, fineness/coarseness, warmth/cold, being/non-being. One half of the opposition he called positive (light, fineness, warmth, being), 
the other negative. We might find this division into positive and negative poles childishly simple except for one difficulty: which one is positive, 
weight or lightness? 

Parmenides responded: lightness is positive, weight negative. 

Was he correct or not? That is the question. The only certainty is: the lightness weight opposition is the 
most mysterious, most ambiguous of all. 

I have been thinking about Tomas for many years. But only in the light of these reflections did I see him 
clearly. 1 saw him standing at the window of his flat and looking across the courtyard at the opposite 
walls, not knowing what to do. 

He had first met Tereza about three weeks earlier in a small Czech town. They had spent scarcely an 
hour together. She had accompanied him to the station and waited with him until he boarded the train. Ten 
days later she paid him a visit. They made love the day she arrived. That night she came down with a 
fever and stayed a whole week in his flat with the flu. 

He had come to feel an inexplicable love for this all but complete stranger; she seemed a child to him, 
a child someone had put in a bulrush basket daubed with pitch and sent downstream for Tomas to fetch at 
the riverbank of his bed. 

She stayed with him a week, until she was well again, then went back to her town, some hundred and 
twenty- five miles from Prague. And then came the time 1 have just spoken of and see as the key to his life: 
Standing by the window, he looked out over the courtyard at the walls opposite him and deliberated. 

Should he call her back to Prague for good? He feared the responsibility. If he invited her to come, then 
come she would, and offer him up her life. 

Or should he refrain from approaching her? Then she would remain a waitress in a hotel restaurant of a 
provincial town and he would never see her again. 

Did he want her to come or did he not? 

He looked out over the courtyard at the opposite walls, seeking an answer. 



He kept recalling her lying on his bed; she reminded him of no one in his former life. She was neither 
mistress nor wife. She was a child whom he had taken from a bulrush basket that had been daubed with 
pitch and sent to the riverbank of his bed. She fell asleep. He knelt down next to her. Her feverous breath 
quickened and she gave out a weak moan. He pressed his face to hers and whispered calming words into 
her sleep. After a while he felt her breath return to normal and her face rise unconsciously to meet his. He 
smelled the delicate aroma of her fever and breathed it in, as if trying to glut himself with the intimacy of 
her body. And all at once he fancied she had been with him for many years and was dying. He had a 
sudden clear feeling that he would not survive her death. He would lie down beside her and want to die 
with her. He pressed his face into the pillow beside her head and kept it there for a long time. 

Now he was standing at the window trying to call that moment to account. What could it have been if 
not love declaring itself to him? 

But was it love? The feeling of wanting to die beside her was clearly exaggerated: he had seen her only 
once before in his life! Was it simply the hysteria of a man who, aware deep down of his inaptitude for 
love, felt the self-deluding need to simulate it? His unconscious was so cowardly that the best partner it 
could choose for its little comedy was this miserable provincial waitress with practically no chance at all 
to enter his life! 

Looking out over the courtyard at the dirty walls, he realized he had no idea whether it was hysteria or 
love. 

And he was distressed that in a situation where a real man would instantly have known how to act, he 
was vacillating and therefore depriving the most beautiful moments he had ever experienced (kneeling at 
her bed and thinking he would not survive her death) of their meaning. 

He remained annoyed with himself until he realized that not knowing what he wanted was actually 
quite natural. 

We can never know what to want, because, living only one life, we can neither compare it with our 
previous lives nor perfect it in our lives to come. 

Was it better to be with Tereza or to remain alone? 

There is no means of testing which decision is better, because there is no basis for comparison. We 
live everything as it comes, without warning, like an actor going on cold. And what can life be worth if 
the first rehearsal for life is life itself? That is why life is always like a sketch. No, "sketch" is not quite 
the word, because a sketch is an outline of something, the groundwork for a picture, whereas the sketch 
that is our life is a sketch for nothing, an outline with no picture. 

Einmal ist keinmal, says Tomas to himself. What happens but once, says the German adage, might as 
well not have happened at all. If we have only one life to live, we might as well not have lived at all. 
